Europe is probably a lot further north
than you think it is. There's sort of a
popular misconception that Europe and
North America are roughly at the same
latitude, but this couldn't be further
from the truth in reality. If you place
North American cities in Europe at the
same latitude, you'd find that cities
like Denver, Chicago, Detroit, and New
York would roughly line up with Italy.
Well, very cold cities like Calgary and
Edmonton would be between Germany and
Britain. Meanwhile, if you did the
reverse and placed European cities in
North America at the same latitude,
you'd find cities like Budapest, Paris,
Berlin, Amsterdam, and Dublin in Canada.
And then cities like Helsinki, Oslo,
Trondheim, and Reykjavik way up in the
deep north of Canada. For its latitude
this far up north, the European
continent's climate is dramatically more
mild than would be initially expected
compared with North America. But that
may be starting to change. You see, one
of the primary reasons why Europe is
warmer today than it should be is thanks
to the primary system of ocean currents
in the Atlantic Ocean. It's called the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation, or the AMOC, or the AMOC
for short. The sheer scale of the AMOC
is almost incomprehensible for a human
to fully grasp, but it essentially
functions as a gigantic conveyor belt
that moves warm and cold water
throughout the Atlantic Ocean that is
driven by differences in seawater
density, which itself is influenced by
temperature and salinity levels. The
AMOC is only part of a broader worldwide
system of ocean currents that moves heat
across the globe. But for our purposes
explaining why Europe is warmer than it
otherwise should be, we're really only
going to focus on the AMOC part of the
system within the Atlantic. The AMOC is
fueled by the formation of deep water in
the high latitudes of the North Atlantic
near Greenland. Here, warmer surface
waters are cooled down by the
atmosphere. As the water here evaporates
and forms sea ice, more salt is also
left behind in the ocean. Cold water is
more dense than warm water, and salty
water is more dense than fresh water,
which means the colder, saltier water is
a lot more dense than warmer, less salty
water is. As a result, the colder and
saltier water up here sinks, and then
travels south along the bottom of the
ocean thousands of meters beneath the
surface all the way to the South
Atlantic near to the Antarctic. Once
here, the powerful prevailing winds that
originate from the west help pull this
deep, cold water back up to the surface
again in a process known as upwelling.
This water is then carried back along
the surface again northwest all the way
to the Gulf of Mexico in the tropics,
where they heat back up and then merge
with the Gulf Stream. The powerful
prevailing winds that blow west to east
towards Europe. This then carries the
warm tropical surface waters northeast
across the Atlantic Ocean towards
northwestern Europe, where they help to
moderate the climate around Britain and
Ireland, northern France, and
Scandinavia.
Along the way, this warmer surface water
steadily collects more salt thanks to
evaporation and an influx of saltier
waters from the Mediterranean Sea. And
once these waters reach the Arctic, they
start getting colder again, too, and
sink, completing the whole loop around
the Atlantic and starting the whole
cycle over again. This whole system is
frequently referred to as a sort of
global conveyor belt that transports
warmth to Europe and cold to Antarctica.
And it operates on a very long
timescale.
>> [music]
>> In order to make just one complete
journey along the entire loop, it'll
take a single molecule of water hundreds
to even thousands of years. And in
addition to moving heat and cold around
the Atlantic and influencing climates,
the AMOC also carries nutrients around
the ocean that supports marine life just
about everywhere, too. Without the
warmer surface waters pulled from the
Gulf of Mexico by the AMOC, northwest
Europe would be just as naturally frigid
as comparable latitudes are in Canada,
like Labrador, Quebec, and Nunavut. And
unfortunately, this seems to be the
future that we might actually be heading
towards because multiple scientists are
currently sounding the alarm that the
AMOC could be collapsing as a result of
climate change. And as a result, Europe
might strangely become the only part of
the world that actually cools down in
the era of climate change. And by cool
down, I mean potentially go through a
modern ice age era. You might be
familiar with this as a loose plot point
from the 2004 disaster film The Day
After Tomorrow, in which the disruption
of the AMOC leads to a cataclysmic
climate shift that rapidly transitions
the Earth into a new ice age in only a
matter of days, forcing glacial ice
sheets to almost immediately expand
south and envelop cities like New York,
London, Berlin, and Tokyo before they
can be adequately evacuated. This
catastrophic worldwide freezing scenario
is very implausible, to say the least.
But it is at least partially based in a
real-world fear. What actually will
happen if the AMOC collapses? And there
are plenty of signs that that part of
the story is actually starting to
happen. As the world in general
increasingly warms up because of climate
change, the pace of melting across the
Greenland ice sheet continues
accelerating, which is adding more and
more fresh water into the North Atlantic
and diluting the oceans nearby salinity
levels. At the same time as sea level
temperatures are also generally
increasing. The result is that the
waters around Greenland are getting less
salty and warmer, which is making the
water less dense and less capable of
sinking,
prevent the formation of the cold,
salty, deep water current of the AMOC
that flows from the Arctic down to the
Antarctic, with cascading consequences
further along the loop. In other words,
the faster that the Greenland ice sheet
melts, the faster the AMOC gets
disrupted. The whole strength of the
current begins to slow down with the
less amount of cold, salty water that's
sinking in the Arctic, which causes the
AMOC's strength, pulling warm water from
the Gulf of Mexico towards Europe, that
picks up more salt along the way, to
weaken as well, which causes the North
Atlantic to continue becoming more
diluted with less salt inputs, which
exacerbates the problem in a dangerous
feedback loop that keeps making the
water less and less capable of actually
sinking. At the same time, as the air in
the North Atlantic gets warmer with
climate change, the water in the ocean
loses more of its ability to transfer
its heat at the surface and sink, which
is only further breaking down the AMOC.
Eventually, there's an unclear tipping
point in this feedback loop that can be
reached where the AMOC won't be capable
of recovering for a minimum of
centuries, [music]
no matter what humans do. Even if we
managed to completely reverse the pace
of climate change and radically reduce
our emissions, because of how
slow-moving the entire system is.
Because it takes water as much as a
thousand years or longer transported of
the entire loop of the AMOC, once it
gets shut down, it'll take at least that
long to get it all restarted again,
which means that if it reaches its
tipping point and then shuts down, the
world and humanity will have to deal
with a myriad consequences for many
centuries to come. Climate and oceanic
scientists have been warning about the
possibility of the AMOC to weaken or
collapse for decades now, at least since
the 1960s.
Back then, however, there was little
concrete data on this as a possibility,
mere inference, and it was long regarded
as a minuscule possibility. But since
then, researchers have developed a
complex ocean-spanning system to
actually monitor and track what's
happening to the AMOC. A part of this
system is the Rapid Array that was
launched in 2004 in a collaboration
between the UK's National Environment
Research Council and America's National
Science Foundation and NOAA. Roughly
spanning the entire North Atlantic
between the Bahamas in the west and the
Canary Islands in the east, the RAPID
array consists of 24 sub-surface
moorings with sensors that are bolted to
wires stretching all the way down to the
ocean floor. RAPID collects multiple
measurements across the North Atlantic
from the strength of currents to
temperatures and pressure and more. It
has been continually collecting these
measurements for more than 22 years now
since it was launched in 2004. RAPID is
the largest system that's keeping track
of the AMOC, but there's others that
collect their own measurements with
similar technology, too. Like OSNAP
between Canada and the UK and SAMBA
between South America and South Africa.
And the data that we've been receiving
from these systems of what's happening
to the AMOC is certainly troubling.
Generally, the strength of the AMOC's
ability to transport water around the
Atlantic is measured in units of 1
million cubic meters of water per
second, which is also called a Sverdrup.
One Sverdrup equals 1 million cubic
meters of water per second. Now, roughly
to date, this is all of the data that
the RAPID array has collected since it
was launched in 2004 with years along
the x-axis and Sverdrup values along the
y-axis. The solid curvy line that you're
seeing is the average measured strength
of the AMOC since 2004, but the
straighter dashed line running down the
center is the observed trend line, which
as you can see has been declining. But
in a more concrete terms, the observed
strength of the AMOC has declined from
between 18 to 19 Sverdrups between 2004
and 2008 to about 15 to 17 Sverdrups
between 2011 and 2020. Well, a paper
published in Geophysical Research
Letters in 2025 that went over this data
suggested that since 2004, the AMOC has
been gradually weakening by about one
Sverdrup per decade on average. The big
fear is that if the AMOC eventually
begins reaching six Sverdrups of flow or
less from its current 15 to 17, it'll
begin entering into to shutdown phase.
The big questions are how much more will
the AMOC slow down by, when or if the
slowdown will eventually hit the tipping
point of no return, is human-driven
climate change actually driving this
slowdown, and how bad will the
consequences be? And frustratingly,
there are a massive amount of scientific
opinions on all of these questions that
suggest radically different things.
First of all, it's important to clarify
that researchers aren't actually capable
yet of deducing whether or not
human-driven climate change through
greenhouse gas emissions is really
influencing the AMOC, or whether its
downward trend since 2004 is part of a
natural ebb and flow cycle instead.
Having only been running since 2004, 22
years of data collected by the RAPID
array on the AMOC is simply not enough
to determine whether or not climate
change is affecting this decline.
Researchers estimate that they will need
at least 29 years worth of data to come
to a conclusion on that specific
question, meaning that we won't really
confidently know until at least 2033.
Understanding the possible downward
trend in the AMOC is further complicated
by the only piecemeal evidence we have
of its fluctuations before 2004. But, we
do know that it's at least possible for
the AMOC to collapse, because we do know
that it's happened before.
Around the end of the last ice age,
around 12,000 years ago, the melting ice
sheets that once spanned across North
America and Europe dumped a huge amount
of fresh water into the North Atlantic,
which diluted the ocean's water and
affected its density and shut down the
AMOC in a similar way as is presently
being feared with the Greenland ice
sheet melting rate. The end result of
this was massive cooling across North
America and Europe, with average
temperatures in North America dropping
by around 3° C,
in Europe by 5° C,
and in Greenland by 10° C,
while the Southern Hemisphere
simultaneously experienced significant
warming. Changes that took place rapidly
in geologic time over the span of just a
few decades, rather than the days
portrayed in The Day After Tomorrow.
This period of the Earth's history is
known as the Younger Dryas and lasted
for around a thousand years before the
AMOC began restarting again and
returning the warmer temperatures back
to Europe. Whether or not this is going
to happen again in our own near-term
future is a matter of tremendous
scientific debate right now, but there
are already some warning signs that the
AMOC is entering into a slowing down
phase again. Besides for the
measurements that have been taken by the
rapid array, chief among these warning
signs are the sea surface temperatures
being measured in the North Atlantic.
This cool blob of the ocean that's been
measured just off the coast of Greenland
is the only part of the world's oceans
that has been actively cooling down
since the Industrial Revolution. The
precise location where the melting
Greenland ice sheet would be dumping
fresh water and diluting local salinity,
which would be the first step of the
AMOC potentially slowing down and
shutting off, which would start cooling
down the waters here. The existence of
this cold blob of the ocean by
Greenland, a true anomaly worldwide, has
been cited as further evidence that the
AMOC is beginning to break down again.
But precisely how much more it might
break down in the future is still
heavily uncertain and debated. The most
recent assessment report by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change or IPCC, which dates from 2021,
stated that while it was confident the
AMOC will decline over the rest of the
21st century, it maintained a medium
confidence level that it will not
collapse outright before 2100. Instead,
the IPCC's most recent report concluded
that the AMOC will most likely weaken by
between 24% and 39% by 2100, depending
on whether or not the planet is in a low
emissions or high emissions scenario.
However, there is a very large amount of
scientific research that has concluded
that the models used by the IPCC lean
towards unrealistic levels of stability
for the AMOC and are overly optimistic.
There are a lot of under-appreciated
difficulties in creating computing
models of the AMOC because they have to
model out very difficult things to know
like ice melt, precipitation, and cloud
cover among other factors. There are a
lot of criticisms for the IPCC AMOC
models specifically, but the biggest one
is that they so far haven't incorporated
the impact of huge volumes of fresh
water being dumped into the North
Atlantic by the melting Greenland ice
sheet because doing so dramatically
increases the computational power
required to run the simulations beyond
the absurd levels they're already being
run at. And thus, there is a lot of
scientific literature out there that
argues the IPCC has been consistently
underestimating the real danger of an
AMOC collapse. One paper published in
Nature in 2023, which analyzed sea
surface temperatures around the
Greenland cold blob by brother and
sister team Peter and Susanne Ditlevsen,
affiliated with the Niels Bohr Institute
in Copenhagen, argued that if global
emissions continue to increase, a
collapse in the AMOC might take place
sometime between 2037 and 2109.
But at the same time, other studies
published in Nature like this one in
2025 by researchers affiliated with the
UK's Met Office and the University of
Exeter backs the IPCC's latest
conclusion that an AMOC collapse prior
to 2100 is unlikely.
Another problem with most models and
studies into the AMOC is that
historically, most of them terminate in
the year 2100 because running them any
further beyond that, again, dramatically
raises the computational power that's
required. Stefan Rahmstorf, a physical
oceanographer affiliated with the
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact
Research in Germany and one of the
world's leading experts on the AMOC has
analyzed a handful of models that have
been run out to 2300 or later. From this
data, he has reported that the chances
of an AMOC collapse under a high
emission scenario rises to a whopping
70%
with a collapse most often taking place
in the early 2200s, roughly two
centuries from now. Rahmstorf has been
studying the AMOC for more than 35
years, and as recently as this month, he
stated that for the first 30 years or
so, he believed the odds of the AMOC
actually collapsing were minuscule and
only about a 5% chance of happening,
along with the rest of the mainstream
scientific community. But now, armed
with greater evidence, he believes it's
going to be about a 50/50 chance, and
some governments are already starting to
take the risk seriously. [music]
In November of 2025, Iceland became the
first government to designate the risk
of an AMOC shutdown as a national
security threat, and more governments in
Northwestern Europe that stand to lose
the most are likely to follow. And then,
very recently in April of 2026, the most
alarming paper on the future of the AMOC
to date was published in the journal
Science by researchers affiliated with
the University of Bordeaux in France.
Their model, which incorporated
real-world Atlantic Ocean temperature
and salinity data, concluded that the
strength of the AMOC could weaken by 50%
from pre-industrial levels by the end of
this century in 2100.
That's not enough to shut the AMOC down
by the end of this century, but it would
very likely put the AMOC past its
tipping point of no recovery, meaning
that it would likely continue weakening
into a full-on collapse scenario
sometime early in the 2100s.
And if that happens, here are just some
of the many projected consequences.
Without the AMOC bringing warm waters to
Europe that will moderate the climate
anymore, Northwestern Europe will most
likely grow dramatically colder during
the winter. Even if the global
temperature increases by 2° C because of
greenhouse gas emissions, it still won't
be capable of offsetting the larger loss
of heat in Europe that'll happen with
the collapse of the AMOC. During the
winter, the extent of sea ice across
Northwestern Europe will expand
dramatically from today without the
infusion of warm tropical waters from
the tropics. In February, the peak reach
of sea ice will expand throughout the
Baltic Sea and nearly the entire North
Sea, stretching down as far south as
Lincolnshire in Great Britain and the
northern shores of the Netherlands, and
completely enveloping both Denmark and
Scotland. Scandinavia and Iceland will
be practically [music]
fully encapsulated by sea ice during the
winter, while in North America, the sea
ice coverage will extend down as far
south as Newfoundland. In order to keep
conducting maritime trade through the
winter, the Scandinavian and Baltic
countries, along with Britain, the
Netherlands, and Germany, would all need
to invest in a much larger icebreaker
fleet. This dramatic expansion of sea
ice coverage in the winter would also
then reflect more sunlight and serve to
reduce the local temperatures even
further.
Winters across Northwestern Europe would
grow much harsher than they are today.
London's average winter temperature
would drop by 2° C from today and would
experience once-in-10-year [music]
cold extremes of as much as -20° C
while Edinburgh, further north, could
experience extremes of as much as -30°
C.
Scandinavia, meanwhile, will basically
be plunged into an ice age every winter.
The average winter temperature in Oslo,
Norway's capital, would be projected to
drop by nearly 15° C from today, and it
could experience cold extremes as bad as
-48°
C.
Scandinavia's climate will more resemble
Siberia's under this scenario, and all
of this will mean dramatically more
usage of energy throughout the winter
for heating, and critical strains on
existing infrastructure that isn't
designed to handle these kinds of cold
extremes. Precipitation levels across
Northwestern Europe would dry out, and
the region would also grow much more
arid than it is today as well. Worse,
the ability for farmers to conduct
rain-fed arable agriculture across the
UK and Ireland would effectively become
impossible under the scenario, too. And
so, the agricultural outputs of both the
UK and Ireland would most likely
collapse. Weirder, the loss of the AMOC
probably wouldn't cause Northwestern
Europe to cool down very much in the
summer. Summer temperatures would likely
remain about the same as they are today,
which means that there will be some
truly wild temperature swings on the
continent between the winter and summer
seasons that will, again, somewhat
resemble what happens in Siberia.
Southern Europe, meanwhile, which is
less influenced by the AMOC, would grow
warmer along with the rest of the world,
and would experience increasing rates of
drought from the loss of precipitation.
Well, the average year-round temperature
difference between northern and southern
Europe would climb up by a whopping 4° C
from where they are today, meaning that
storms across the European continent
will almost certainly grow stronger in
intensity. Most of the analysis into the
consequences of an AMOC collapse focus
on Europe, because that's where most of
the funding into AMOC research has come
from, and it's also one of the places
that will be the most negatively
affected by it. But that doesn't mean
that other places won't be negatively
affected as well. While Northwestern
Europe will grow colder with the loss of
warm water, Antarctica will grow warmer
with the loss of colder water, to the
point where temperatures in Antarctica
could rise by an astonishing 6° C,
which could rapidly accelerate the
melting rate of Antarctic ice, and
contribute further to greater sea level
rises. And without the current pulling
huge volumes of water from the US East
Coast towards Europe, sea levels would
likely rise swiftly along the US East
Coast as well. The rainy and dry seasons
in the Amazon region of South America
might flip [music] and the tropical rain
belt will shift south, which will
increase drought in the Sahel region of
Africa and weaken the monsoon season in
Asia. While it won't be as rapid or as
catastrophic as the events portrayed in
The Day After Tomorrow, the consequences
of an AMOC collapse are still bad enough
to be taken deadly serious by world
governments. And even if it doesn't
outright collapse within our own
lifetimes by the end of this century, it
weakening in our lifetimes will still
generate some level of these negative
consequences. While we could be pushing
the AMOC past its tipping point toward
an inevitable collapse next [music]
century that the next 1,000 years of
human generations will have to deal
with. And what do you think the land
will have to say about us for having
potentially caused that?
And on another note, what do you think
you'd have to say to your prior self for
having signed up for a bunch of
subscriptions that are still costing you
money today? We all subscribe to things
that charge us a little bit of money
every month now, usually not enough for
us to pay attention to it, but enough to
add up over time. There's a lot of
companies out there whose entire
business model is just hoping that
you'll sign up for something and then
forget you ever did so so that they can
just keep charging you month after
month. It's extremely annoying and also
really hard to keep track of, but
luckily there's a solution. Rocket
Money, the sponsor of this video. You
link Rocket Money access to your bank
and credit card accounts and it fishes
out all of the recurring subscriptions
that you're paying for. Lets you see
them all clearly in one place and then
enables you to easily cancel the ones
you no longer want to keep going. When I
did this, I found out that I'd been
subscribed to tons and tons of small
local newspapers that I had signed up
for once in order to read an important
story for a video I was producing that I
then immediately forgotten about. I
never read anything from these
subscriptions ever again, but they were
still charging me like $3 a month
anyway, and I never noticed because
month to month it was never enough to
make me notice. But they kept on adding
up over time and Rocket Money finally
enabled me to see all of this in one
place. It was so easy and it also saved
me the time of having to go through the
cumbersome process of trying to
individually cancel all of these
subscriptions I didn't need. And there's
a lot more than just the recurring
payments feature that I found to be
worthwhile. They'll also help you
negotiate your bills to be lower. For
example, a lot of us are paying too much
for our internet. Rocket Money often
knows this and they know how to get your
number down if it's possible. They'll
also analyze your finances and pull out
trends and insights that it sees within
your spending habits, which makes it
super simple for you to see where you're
spending too much money. They can also
help you reach your goals as you can set
a budget and then use the app to track
your progress sticking to it through
time. So, if you want to take control of
your finances and save some money, you
can try this out for free by going to my
link down below in the description or by
scanning the QR code here on your
screen. And you can unlock even more
features with their premium option. It's
also a great way to help support my own
channel at the same time, and as always,
thank you so much for watching.